update lightstep snco docs for rebrand and new demo (#13996)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/tasks/observability/distributed-tracing/lightstep/index.md

---

> title: ServiceNow Cloud Observability (Lightstep)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: ServiceNow Cloud Observability (formerly Lightstep)
```

> description: How to configure the proxies to send tracing requests to ServiceNow Cloud Observability (Lightstep).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: How to configure the proxies to send tracing requests to ServiceNow Cloud Observability.
```

{{< boilerplate telemetry-tracing-tips >}}

> This task shows you how to configure Istio to collect trace spans and send them to [ServiceNow Cloud Observability](https://lightstep.com) (SNCO).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This task shows you how to configure Istio to collect trace spans and send them to [Cloud Observability](https://lightstep.com).
```

> This task shows you how to configure Istio to collect trace spans and send them to [ServiceNow Cloud Observability](https://lightstep.com) (SNCO).

Reviewer: use new URL

> SNCO lets you analyze 100% of unsampled transaction data from large scale production software to produce meaningful

Reviewer 2: SNCO is not an approved external acronym. We have to spell out Cloud Observability. After the first instance of ServiceNow (in this case in the title), you can omit ServiceNow

> SNCO lets you analyze 100% of unsampled transaction data from large scale production software to produce meaningful

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cloud Observability lets you analyze 100% of unsampled transaction data from large-scale production software to produce meaningful
```

## Before you begin

> 1. Ensure you have a SNCO account. You can use the free community tier and sign up [here](https://info.servicenow.com/developersignup.html).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Ensure you have a Cloud Observability account. 
```

Reviewer 2: We no longer have the free dev tier.

> 1. Ensure sure you have a SNCO [access token](https://docs.lightstep.com/docs/create-and-manage-access-tokens). Access tokens allow your app to communicate with your SNCO project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Ensure sure you have a Cloud Observability [access token](https://docs.lightstep.com/docs/create-and-manage-access-tokens). Access tokens allow your app to communicate with your project.
```

## Setup Istio

> Before installing Istio you will need to have a Kubernetes cluster running a supported version of Kubernetes. For Istio v.19 this is Kubernetes versions 1.25, 1.26, 1.27 or 1.28. See here for a list of supported Kubernetes versions if you are installing a different version of Istio.

Reviewer 3: Note to add a link here to check a full list of k8s versions.

Reviewer: You don't want to have to main this, so just assume that someone has Istio (or link to a setup guide) and give the specific changes for Cloud Observability.

### Download and Extract Istio

> 1. Use the following command to download and extract the latest Istio release for your operating system (Linux of macOS). For other releases and operating systems, download the your installation file from the Istio releases page

Reviewer 3: Linux or macOS?

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ curl -L <https://istio.io/downloadIstio> | sh -
    {{< /text >}}

1. Change to the directory where you extracted Istio. For example, if you downloaded the latest using the command above the directory will be `istio-1.19.0` (or similar depending on which version you downloaded)

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ cd istio-1.19.0
    {{< /text >}}

> 1. Add istioctl to your PATH (Linux or macOS)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Add `istioctl` to your PATH (Linux or macOS)
```

> {{< text bash >}}
> $ curl -L <https://istio.io/downloadIstio> | sh -
> {{< /text >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    {{< text bash >}}
    $ curl -L <https://istio.io/downloadIstio> | sh -
    {{< /text >}}
```

> {{< text bash >}}
> $ cd istio-1.19.0
> {{< /text >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    {{< text bash >}}
    $ cd istio-1.19.0
    {{< /text >}}
```

> {{< text bash >}}
> $ export PATH=$PWD/bin:$PATH
> {{< /text >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    {{< text bash >}}
    $ export PATH=$PWD/bin:$PATH
    {{< /text >}}
```

### Install Istio in your Cluster

1. Use `istioctl` to install Istio in your cluster. The example below uses the `demo` configuration profile which is ideal for the purposes of this guide. See the [available configuration profiles](/docs/setup/additional-setup/config-profiles/) for more info.

> {{< text bash >}}
> $ istioctl install --set profile=demo -y
> {{< /text >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    {{< text bash >}}
    $ istioctl install --set profile=demo -y
    {{< /text >}}
```

1. Add the following label to your Kubernetes namespace. This instructs Istio to automatically inject Envoy sidecar proxies with your pods in this namespace.

> {{< text bash >}}
> $ kubectl label namespace default istio-injection=enabled
> {{< /text >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl label namespace default istio-injection=enabled
    {{< /text >}}
```

### Verify Installation

1. You now have Istio installed and running in your cluster. Let’s take a look at what was installed. Run the following command:

> {{< text bash >}}
> $ kubectl get pods -n istio-system
> {{< /text >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl get pods -n istio-system
    {{< /text >}}
```

1. You should see 3 pods: the `istiod` control plane, an ingress gateway and an egress gateway. Let’s check the auto-injection label:

> {{< text bash >}}
> $ kubectl get namespaces --show-labels
> {{< /text >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl get namespaces --show-labels
    {{< /text >}}
```

## Install and run the Bookinfo app

1. Follow the [instructions to deploy the Bookinfo sample application](/docs/examples/bookinfo/#deploying-the-application).

1. Follow the [instructions to create an ingress gateway for the Bookinfo application](/docs/examples/bookinfo/#determine-the-ingress-ip-and-port).

1. To verify the previous step's success, confirm that you set `GATEWAY_URL` environment variable in your shell.

1. Send traffic to the sample application.

{{< text bash >}}
$ curl http://$GATEWAY_URL/productpage
{{< /text >}}

## Collect OpenTelemetry Traces

### Deploy an OpenTelemetry Collector

The OpenTelemetry Collector provides a vendor-agnostic solution for receiving, processing and exporting telemetry data. We won’t cover the collector in depth here but I encourage you to review the documentation on the collector to learn more about the features and capabilities it provides. For the purposes of this guide, the collector is used to receive the telemetry data from Istio, batch the data and export it to Cloud Observability.

1. Create a new filed name `otel-collector.yaml`

1. Add the following `ConfigMap` to the file.

> {{< text yaml >}}

Reviewer 3: Indent 4 spaces for this whole yaml block.

apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: opentelemetry-collector-conf
  namespace: istio-system
  labels:
    app: opentelemetry-collector
data:
  opentelemetry-collector-config: |
    receivers:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:
          http:
    processors:
      batch:
    exporters:
      otlp/lightstep:
        endpoint: ingest.lightstep.com:443
        headers:
          "lightstep-access-token": "<YOUR_TOKEN>"
      logging:
        loglevel: debug
    extensions:
      health_check:
    service:
      extensions:
      - health_check
      pipelines:
        logs:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: [batch]
          exporters: [logging]
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: [batch]
          exporters: [logging, otlp/lightstep]
        metrics:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: [batch]
          exporters: [logging, otlp/lightstep]
{{< /text >}}

> 1. Update `<YOUR_TOKEN>` with a Lightstep access token for your project in Cloud Observability. See the instructions [here](https://docs.lightstep.com/docs/create-and-manage-access-tokens) on how to create and manage access tokens in Cloud Observability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Update `<YOUR_TOKEN>` with an access token for your project. See the instructions [here](https://docs.lightstep.com/docs/create-and-manage-access-tokens) on how to create and manage access tokens in Cloud Observability.
```

1. Add the following `service` definition to the file

> {{< text yaml >}}

Reviewer 3: Indent 4 spaces for this whole yaml block.

apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: opentelemetry-collector
  namespace: istio-system
  labels:
    app: opentelemetry-collector
spec:
  ports:
    - name: grpc-otlp # Default endpoint for OpenTelemetry receiver.
      port: 4317
      protocol: TCP
      targetPort: 4317
  selector:
    app: opentelemetry-collector
{{< /text >}}

1. Add the following `deployment` to the file

> {{< text yaml >}}

Reviewer 3: Indent 4 spaces for this whole yaml block.

                  apiVersion: v1
                  fieldPath: metadata.namespace
          image: otel/opentelemetry-collector:0.71.0
          imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
          name: opentelemetry-collector
          ports:
            - containerPort: 4317
              protocol: TCP
          resources:
            limits:
              cpu: "2"
              memory: 4Gi
            requests:
              cpu: 200m
              memory: 400Mi
          terminationMessagePath: /dev/termination-log
          terminationMessagePolicy: File
          volumeMounts:
            - name: opentelemetry-collector-config-vol
              mountPath: /conf
      dnsPolicy: ClusterFirst
      restartPolicy: Always
      schedulerName: default-scheduler
      terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 30
      volumes:
        - configMap:
            defaultMode: 420
            items:
              - key: opentelemetry-collector-config
                path: opentelemetry-collector-config.yaml
            name: opentelemetry-collector-conf
          name: opentelemetry-collector-config-vol
{{< /text >}}

1. Deploy the collector to the `istio-system` namespace in the cluster

> {{< text bash >}}
> $ kubectl apply -f otel-collector.yaml -n istio-system
> {{< /text >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl apply -f otel-collector.yaml -n istio-system
    {{< /text >}}
```

> **Note:** This example uses a specific version of the collector. To use the latest version or some other preferred version, update the `image` with the latest version of the `opentelemetry-collector`. See [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/releases) for the list of collector releases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note:** This example uses a specific version of the Collector. To use the latest version or some other preferred version, update the `image` with the latest version of the `opentelemetry-collector`. See [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/releases) for the list of Collector releases.
```

> The OpenTelemetry Collector is now deployed and running in the cluster. Now we need to configure Istio to send the distributed tracing data to the collector.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The OpenTelemetry Collector is now deployed and running in the cluster. Now we need to configure Istio to send the distributed tracing data to the Collector.
```

### Configure Istio Telemetry

> With the collector deployed and configured to export data to Cloud Observability we now need to configure Istio to use OpenTelemetry and send the telemetry data to the collector.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the Collector deployed and configured to export data to Cloud Observability, we now need to configure Istio to use OpenTelemetry and send the telemetry data to the Collector.
```

1. Create a new file named `istio-telemetry.yaml`
1. Add the following ConfigMap to the file. This configures Istio to use OpenTelemetry for tracing and configures the service (the collector) where it should send the OpenTelemetry data.

> {{< text yaml >}}

Reviewer 3: Indent 4 spaces for this yaml block.

> 1. Add the following ConfigMap to the file. This configures Istio to use OpenTelemetry for tracing and configures the service (the collector) where it should send the OpenTelemetry data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Add the following `ConfigMap` to the file. This configures Istio to use OpenTelemetry for tracing and configures the service (the Collector) where it should send the OpenTelemetry data.
```

apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: istio
  namespace: istio-system
  annotations:
    meta.helm.sh/release-name: istiod
    meta.helm.sh/release-namespace: istio-system
  labels:
    app.kubernetes.io/managed-by: Helm
    install.operator.istio.io/owning-resource: unknown
    istio.io/rev: default
    operator.istio.io/component: Pilot
    release: istiod
data:
  meshNetworks: |-
        networks: {}

  mesh: |-
    defaultConfig:
      discoveryAddress: istiod.istio-system.svc:15012
      tracing: {}
    defaultProviders:
      tracing:
        - opentelemetry
    extensionProviders:
      - name: "opentelemetry"
        opentelemetry:
          service: "opentelemetry-collector.istio-system.svc.cluster.local"
          port: 4317
    enablePrometheusMerge: true
    rootNamespace: null
    trustDomain: cluster.local
{{< /text >}}

1. Next add the following `Telemetry` configuration to the file. This configures Istio to use the configuration created above for telemetry.

> {{< text yaml >}}

Reviewer 3: Indent 4 spaces for this yaml block.

apiVersion: telemetry.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: Telemetry
metadata:
  name: mesh-default
  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  accessLogging:
    - providers:
        - name: opentelemetry
  tracing:
    - providers:
        - name: opentelemetry
      randomSamplingPercentage: 100
{{< /text >}}

1. Deploy the configuration in the istio-system namespace

> {{< text bash >}}
> $ kubectl apply -f istio-telemetry.yaml -n istio-system
> {{< /text >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl apply -f istio-telemetry.yaml -n istio-system
    {{< /text >}}
```

#### Restart Your Workloads

Anytime the Istio configuration is updated you need to restart your workloads so the sidecars get re-injected with the updated configuration. The following is an example of how to restart a deployment:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl rollout restart deployment -n NAMESPACE DEPLOYMENT_NAME
{{< /text >}}

Restart the **Bookinfo** deployments before proceeding. The following will give you a list of deployments. If using a namespace other than the default namespace be sure to add `-n NAMESPACE` to the following command

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get deployments
{{< /text >}}

Istio is now configured to use OpenTelemetry for distributed tracing and send the tracing data to the OpenTelemetry Collector. Let’s test it all out and review the data in Cloud Observability.

> ## See the Results in SNCO

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## See the Results in Cloud Observability
```

Istio is now configured to send OpenTelemetry data to Cloud Observability via a local OpenTelemetry Collector. Let’s use the **Bookinfo** application to test our configuration and review the results in Cloud Observability.

1. Load the **Bookinfo** app in your browser again and refresh a few times to generate some traces.

> 1. Sign in to ServiceNow Cloud Observability

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Sign in to [Cloud Observability](https://app.lightstep.com).
```

1. Click on Notebooks in the side navigation bar

>     {{< image link="./notebooks.png" caption="Open SNCO Notebooks" >}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    {{< image link="./notebooks.png" caption="Open Cloud Observability Notebooks" >}}
```

> {{< image link="./notebooks.png" caption="Open SNCO Notebooks" >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    {{< image link="./notebooks.png" caption="Open SNCO Notebooks" >}}
```

1. In the Unified Query Builder change `All telemetry` to `Spans with`

> {{< image link="./spans-with.png" caption="Use the Unified Query Builder" >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    {{< image link="./spans-with.png" caption="Use the Unified Query Builder" >}}
```

1. In the `Search for a span attribute key` text box enter `service` then in the `Search for values` text box enter `productpage.default` and hit enter. This will execute the query to get latency values from all spans for the service `productpage.default` in the last hour

> {{< image link="./query-input.png" caption="Update the query" >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    {{< image link="./query-input.png" caption="Update the query" >}}
```

1. Below the chart, click on the `Span samples` tab. This shows a list of all spans that match the query. Click on one of the span records in the table. This will load the trace view for the trace that includes that span in a new tab.

> {{< image link="./span-samples.png" caption="Open the matching span results" >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    {{< image link="./span-samples.png" caption="Open the matching span results" >}}
```

Review the information that is available in this trace view. You should see a tree of the `egress` and `ingress` operations and the amount of latency they contributed as the request flows through the `istio-ingressgateway` to the `productpage` and from `productpage` to the `details` service. Click on each of the operations and notice the attributes that are populated in the sidebar on the right. You should see rich data about the context of the operation including versions, namespace, protocols, networking details, user agent and more.

{{< image link="./trace-view.png" caption="Explore your selected trace" >}}

## Conclusion

> You now have Istio configured for tracing with OpenTelemetry and a collector deployed to export the data to SNCO. Using this data you can monitor the health of requests flowing through your services and build dependency diagrams to visualize your microservice architecture. The rich span data provides important information about the context of requests and enables powerful querying capabilities to aid your investigations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You now have Istio configured for tracing with OpenTelemetry and a Collector deployed to export the data to Cloud Observability. Using this data you can monitor the health of requests flowing through your services and build dependency diagrams to visualize your microservice architecture. The rich span data provides important information about the context of requests and enables powerful querying capabilities to aid your investigations.
```

All of this was accomplished without needing to modify any of the actual services running in your cluster. This solution allows you to start observing your applications with minimal effort and without the need to involve the service teams.

### Additional Resources

> To further your journey with Istio, OpenTelemetry and SNCO, take a look at some of these resources:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To further your journey with Istio, OpenTelemetry and Cloud Observability, take a look at some of these resources:
```

> * [Configure Istio to Send Metrics to Cloud Observability](https://docs.lightstep.com/integrations/ingest-metrics-istio)

Reviewer: are these valid with new product name?

> * [Configure Istio to Send Metrics to SNCO](https://docs.lightstep.com/integrations/ingest-metrics-istio)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [Configure Istio to Send Metrics to Cloud Observability](https://docs.lightstep.com/integrations/ingest-metrics-istio)
```

* [Understand Distributed Tracing](https://docs.lightstep.com/docs/understand-distributed-tracing)
* [Monitor Kubernetes Applications](https://docs.lightstep.com/docs/monitor-k8s-applications)
* [Customizing Istio Metrics with Telemetry API](/docs/tasks/observability/metrics/telemetry-api/)
* [Query and Visualize Your Data in Cloud Observability](https://docs.lightstep.com/docs/query-your-data)
* [Observability Primer](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/observability-primer/)

## Trace sampling

Istio captures traces at a configurable trace sampling percentage. To learn how to modify the trace sampling percentage,
visit the [Distributed Tracing trace sampling section](/docs/tasks/observability/distributed-tracing/mesh-and-proxy-config/#customizing-trace-sampling).

> When using SNCO, we do not recommend reducing the trace sampling percentage below 100%. To handle a high traffic mesh, consider scaling up the size of your satellite pool.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using Cloud Observability, we do not recommend reducing the trace sampling percentage below 100%. To handle a high-traffic mesh, consider scaling up the size of your satellite pool.
```

## Cleanup

> If you are not planning any follow-up tasks, remove the Bookinfo sample application and any SNCO secrets

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are not planning any follow-up tasks, remove the Bookinfo sample application and any Cloud Observability secrets.
```

from your cluster.

1. To remove the Bookinfo application, refer to the [Bookinfo cleanup](/docs/examples/bookinfo/#cleanup) instructions.

> 1. Remove the secret generated for SNCO:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Remove the secret generated for Cloud Observability:
```
